A tragic split2016-06-24HOW quickly the unthinkable became the irreversible. A year ago few people imagined that the legions of Britons who love to whinge about the European Union—silly regulations, bloated budgets and pompous bureaucrats—would actually vote to leave the club of countries that buy nearly half of Britain’s exports. Yet, by the early hours of June 24th, it was clear that voters had ignored the warnings of economists, allies and their own government and, after more than four decades in the EU, were about to step boldly into the unknown.The tumbling of the pound to 30-year lows offered a taste of what is to come. As confidence plunges, Britain may well dip into recession. A permanently less vibrant economy means fewer jobs, lower tax receipts and, eventually, extra austerity. The result will also shake a fragile world economy. Scots, most of whom voted to Remain, may now be keener to break free of the United Kingdom, as they nearly did in 2014. Across the Channel, Eurosceptics such as the French National Front will see Britain’s flounce-out as encouragement. The EU, an institution that has helped keep the peace in Europe for half a century, has suffered a grievous blow.Managing the aftermath, which saw the country split by age, class and geography, will need political dexterity in the short run; in the long run it may require a redrawing of traditional political battle-lines and even subnational boundaries. There will be a long period of harmful uncertainty. Nobody knows when Britain will leave the EU or on what terms. But amid Brexiteers’ jubilation and Remain’s recriminations, two questions stand out: what does the vote mean for Britain and Europe? And what comes next?Brexit: the small print The vote to Leave amounts to an outpouring of fury against the “establishment”. Everyone from Barack Obama to the heads of NATO and the IMF urged Britons to embrace the EU. Their entreaties were spurned by voters who rejected not just their arguments but the value of “experts” in general. Large chunks of the British electorate that have borne the brunt of public-spending cuts and have failed to share in Britain’s prosperity are now in thrall to an angry populism.Britons offered many reasons for rejecting the EU, from the democratic deficit in Brussels to the weakness of the euro-zone economies. But the deal-breaking feature of EU membership for Britain seemed to be the free movement of people. As the number of new arrivals has grown, immigration has risen up the list of voters’ concerns.Accordingly, the Leave side promised supporters both a thriving economy and control over immigration. But Britons cannot have that outcome just by voting for it. If they want access to the EU’s single market and to enjoy the wealth it brings, they will have to accept free movement of people. If Britain rejects free movement, it will have to pay the price of being excluded from the single market. The country must pick between curbing migration and maximising wealth.David Cameron is not the man to make that choice. Having recklessly called the referendum and led a failed campaign, he has shown catastrophic misjudgment and cannot credibly negotiate Britain’s departure. That should now fall to a new prime minister.We believe that he or she should opt for a Norwegian-style deal that gives full access to the world’s biggest single market, but maintains the principle of the free movement of people. The reason is that this would maximise prosperity. And the supposed cost—migration—is actually beneficial, as Leave campaigners themselves have said. European migrants are net contributors to public finances, so they more than pay their way for their use of health and education services. Without migrants from the EU, schools, hospitals and industries such as farming and the building trade would be short of labour.Preventing FrexitThe hard task will be telling Britons who voted to Leave that the free having and eating of cake is not an option. The new prime minister will face accusations of selling out—for the simple reason that he or she will indeed have to break a promise, whether over migration or the economy. That is why voters must confirm any deal, preferably in a general election rather than another referendum. This may be easier to win than seems possible today. While a deal is being done, the economy will suffer and immigration will fall of its own accord.Brexit is also a grave blow for the EU. The high-priesthood in Brussels has lost touch with ordinary citizens—and not just in Britain. A recent survey for Pew Research found that in France, a founder member and long a strong supporter, only 38% of people still hold a favourable view of the EU, six points lower than in Britain. In none of the countries the survey looked at was there much support for transferring powers to Brussels.Each country feels resentment in its own way. In Italy and Greece, where the economies are weak, they fume over German-imposed austerity. In France the EU is accused of being “ultra-liberal” (even as Britons condemn it for tying them up in red tape). In eastern Europe traditional nationalists blame the EU for imposing cosmopolitan values like gay marriage.Although the EU needs to deal with popular anger, the remedy lies in boosting growth. Completing the single market in, say, digital services and capital markets would create jobs and prosperity. The euro zone needs stronger underpinnings, starting with a proper banking union. Acting on age-old talk of returning powers, including labour-market regulation, to national governments would show that the EU is not bent on acquiring power no matter what.This newspaper sees much to lament in this vote—and a danger that Britain will become more closed, more isolated and less dynamic. It would be bad for everyone if Great Britain shrivelled into Little England and be worse still if this led to Little Europe. The leaders of Leave counter with the promise to unleash a vibrant, outward-looking 21st-century economy. We doubt that Brexit will achieve this, but nothing would make us happier than to be proved wrong.Read moreAll our Brexit coverage >>

Heard from overseas2016-06-18“The US and the world need your outsized influence to continue—including within Europe.”Barack Obama, American president, April 23rd.“I...would hope and wish for the UK to stay part and parcel of the EU.”Angela Merkel, German chancellor, June 2nd.“I don’t want to scare you but…there will be consequences in many areas.”François Hollande, French president, March 3rd.“Brexit would be a defeat for Europe, but it would be a disaster for the United Kingdom.”Matteo Renzi, Italian prime minister, May 27th.“A vote to leave would make the UK aless attractive destination for Japanese investment.”Shinzo Abe, Japanese prime minister, May 5th.“From our point of view, it is an unalloyed plus for Britain to remain in the EU.”Malcolm Turnbull, Australian prime minister, May 1st.“It is possible to live outside the EU. One is free or one is not.”Marine Le Pen, leader of the French National Front, April 20th.“I know Great Britain very well…I would say they’re better off without it.”Donald Trump, Republican candidate for the American presidency, May 5th.

For hard-line Protestants, leaving Europe is a matter of eschatology2016-06-24IN NORTHERN IRELAND, where a majority of citizens voted to remain in the European Union, there is a small but still significant share of the electorate who will be rejoicing over the result on religious grounds. Among some devoutly evangelical Protestants, the referendum has been viewed as a playing out of religious prophecy. The most widely quoted chapter is Revelations 18, in which an angel cries triumphantly that the evil empire of Babylon has fallen after "all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication." The verse on which preachers have focused is Revelations 18:4.And I heard another voice from heaven, saying: "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."In April, as campaigning for the referendum got underway, a conspicuous slogan urging people to vote for Brexit in the name of that verse appeared on a gable in Tigers Bay, a loyalist area on the north side of Belfast. In a small market town in the west of Northern Ireland, an evangelical group took over a premises on the main street and covered the front in posters urging people to vote "leave" or risk their souls by opting for a political institution which plainly stood for the Antichrist, an impostor whose appearance is a harbinger of the final battle before all earthly things come to end. Along with references to that Revelation verse, there were some secular promises. Britain, freed of Euro-shackles, could strike lucrative trade deals with the world's rising powers. Some readers wondered what purpose such economic projects could serve if the end times are so close.Using the eschatological parts of the Bible to denounce pan-European institutions is a long-standing trope in Ulster Protestant rhetoric. It was a recurring theme in the sermons of Ian Paisley, the preacher-politician who dominated Ulster Protestant politics for decades before striking a peace deal with his declared adversaries. He often alluded to Revelations chapter 17, which describes a depraved woman, the whore of Babylon, sitting upon a horrific, multi-headed, multi-horned scarlet-coloured beast. In Paisley's imagery, the Catholic church was the whore, and the European Union was the beast. Such language is heard in ultra-Protestant circles elsewhere in the world, but Northern Ireland is probably the only place where it has come anywhere close to the political mainstream.Followers of Paisley drew support for this belief from the fact that images of a woman riding a bull feature in sculptures and murals around Brussels and Strasbourg, and on one of the euro coins minted in Greece. These images actually depict Europa, the Phoenician woman who in Greek mythology was abducted by Zeus: the god took the form of a bull in order to impregnate her and conceive King Minos. You may well ask whether the rape of a young lady by a bull-like creature is an edifying symbol for a multi-national enterprise. But this is a pagan image, not a Christian one. And pedants will point out that Zeus took the form of a white bull, not a scarlet one.Read moreAll our Brexit coverage >>

What happens now that Britain has voted for Brexit2016-06-24BRITAIN has voted for Brexit. What happens now? Nothing immediate, is the answer for EU nationals living in Britain and Britons living elsewhere in the EU, as well as for businesses on both sides of the Channel. It will all depend on negotiations that could take years—and no one is sure quite how many years, because the only precedent is Greenland, with a population today of around 50,000, which voted to leave in 1982. The first aim of David Cameron, the prime minister, will be to calm the markets. In Asia they have already responded to the news. The pound plunged by 9% against the dollar and as much as 13% against the yen, traditionally a bolthole for anxious investors. Japan’s main stockmarket tumbled by almost 8%. London’s stockmarket opens at 8am, and the FTSE 100 is likely to dive. Some experts warn that sterling could fall by as much as 20% overall. The chancellor of the exchequer, George Osborne, must now decide whether to issue an emergency “Brexit budget” as he controversially promised before the poll.Mr Cameron has promised that Britain would immediately invoke article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, which sets a two-year timetable to agree the terms of departure. But uncertainty about his own position could raise questions about this. If he steps down and a Brexiteer takes over as leader of the Tory party and as prime minister, he or she is likely to argue that Article 50 is biased against the interests of a country leaving the EU. Under Article 50, the terms of Britain’s departure would be agreed by the other 27 EU countries, without a British vote. So Brexiteers would prefer to negotiate informally, without invoking Article 50. The other 27 countries are unlikely to go for this.The kind of deal offered is a longer-term question, with neither main option very palatable. The first is to become like Norway, which is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA), in return for which it is required to contribute to the EU’s budget and allow the free movement of people. The second is to opt out entirely, trading with the EU under the rules of the World Trade Organisation like America, China or any other country. Most economists agree that this would do more damage to the British economy.It will be hard for Mr Cameron himself to continue, though he may decide to remain prime minister over the summer in order to smooth the transition to a new Tory leader. The candidates for that post will be revving up their engines: Boris Johnson, a former mayor of London, triumphant from the Leave victory; the chancellor, George Osborne, perhaps too wounded by his attachment to the Remain side; and compromise candidates such as Theresa May, the home secretary, who made herself scarce during the campaign. The next leader will have to deal with a deeply divided party and with a Parliament whose MPs mostly supported Remain, and some of whom may want to block approval of full economic secession. Mr Cameron hoped his referendum would settle the question of Europe within the Conservative Party once and for all. It has done the opposite, and the storm is only just beginning.Read moreAll our Brexit coverage >>

The Brexit vote reveals a country split down the middle2016-06-24THOUGH the result remained too close to call four hours after polls closed, it is already clear that a referendum on whether to stay in the European Union has triggered an angry revolt by millions of British voters against their government, the leaders of the main political parties, big business and experts of all stripes. First returns and television interviews with voters and (slightly shell-shocked) political grandees painted a picture of a United Kingdom divided sharply along lines of region, class, age and even—in the case of Northern Ireland, where such Roman Catholic areas as Foyle voted Remain while Protestant areas like North Antrim went for Leave amid much higher turnout—by religious denomination. If the public had quietly weighed the costs and benefits of EU membership, it was often hard to hear that analysis through a din of stuff-the-lot-of-them rage from the Leave camp, and the first growls of mutual recrimination among Labour and Conservative politicians backing Remain.As the night began it appeared that “Leave” camp had done better than expected in rain-lashed, post-industrial northeastern towns with names from a George Orwell story, like Sunderland and Hartlepool, or gritty corners of Essex. Remain had its early strongholds, such as Orkney and Clackmannanshire in Scotland, but turnout in such places underperformed. Leave won in Sunderland by 22%, while Newcastle—a larger city with many students—voted for Remain by a margin of 1%, which was tighter than predicted.Turnout was reported to be lower than Remain campaigners had hoped in London, a city expected to provide deep reservoirs of the sort of higher-income, better-educated and non-white voters who have consistently told pollsters they want to stay in Europe. The capital suffered heavy rain and transport chaos on referendum day, which probably did not help. Against that, some of the first London boroughs to declare, such as Wandsworth, showed a stronger-than-expected 75% vote for Remain. At least going by first results, Wales seemed to have parted company with its Celtic brother, Scotland. Labour-voting former mining valleys and blighted post-industrial towns seemed to be swinging towards Leave.The jumpy mood was felt in financial markets. Currency traders being an impatient bunch, they were quick to celebrate after voting stopped at 10pm, as a YouGov opinion poll was released showing Remain ahead by four percentage points. Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), said Remain seemed likely to “edge it”—a semi-concession that he later retracted. The pound rose to $1.50, its highest level since December, only to plunge as the first results began to trickle in, showing a stronger than expected Leave vote in the gritty northern English city of Sutherland, at one point dropping by more than 3% to below $1.43 in a few seconds.Referendum night felt all the odder because the Remain and Leave camps are themselves internally incoherent. Voting had barely ended when Douglas Carswell, a romantic, libertarian former Conservative member of parliament who defected to UKIP, denounced his own party leader, Mr Farage, for a poster unveiled a few days ago, which showed dark-skinned refugees crossing a field in eastern Europe, beneath the slogan “Breaking Point”. Mr Carswell said: “I think it was morally the wrong thing to do. Angry nativism doesn't win elections in this country.”But if anything the Remain camp was even less united. David Cameron, the Conservative prime minister, only agreed to hold this referendum in 2013 in a moment of political weakness before the most recent general election, as his own members panicked about the threat of UKIP and agitated for a chance to vote on a European Union that most rank-and-file Conservatives dislike or actively loathe. Mr Cameron is no instinctive lover of the EU and struggled to make a positive case for continued membership. Having offered unrealisable promises to reduce net immigration into Britain to tens of thousands a year, he was unable to defend the free movement of workers and people that is one of the EU’s founding pillars. Instead of pointing out that migrants make a positive contribution to the British exchequer, he had to argue that leaving would cause a self-inflicted recession. That may have been true, but did nothing to inspire enthusiasm among voters trying to make up their minds.As voting ended, the Conservative parliamentary party mounted a display of unity. More than 80 Tory members of parliament who want to Leave, including such leading Brexit campaigners and rivals as Boris Johnson, the former mayor of London, signed a letter saying that Mr Cameron should remain as prime minister. But if Britain does vote Remain, the prime minister will be able to use that letter to light his firing-squad cigar, as his party—metaphorically—takes him out and shoots him. Labour also seems likely to tear itself apart, after its hard-left leader, Jeremy Corbyn, campaigned half-heartedly for Remain and the party’s leaders were forced to confront their abandonment by English working-class voters fired up by Leave’s message of anti-globalisation and haul-up-the-drawbridge nativism.After an often ugly campaign on the Leave side, full of untrue warnings about Turkey joining the EU, bringing 76m Turks into the union, and made-up figures about the sums that Britain pays into European budgets, politicians who have worked for years to pull Britain out of the union seemed strangely muted as results flowed in. Their shock is appropriate. Something enormous is happening in Britain—a country that scorns its rulers and is done with deference. Whatever the final result, divisions have opened that will take a long time to heal.

Why Brexit is grim news for the world economy2016-06-24NIGEL FARAGE, the leader of the UK Independence Party, told elated supporters that June 23rd should go down as Britain’s Independence Day. The reaction in financial markets to Britain’s vote to leave the European Union was rather less euphoric. During the Asian trading day, the pound plunged against the dollar by over 10% to $1.32, a 30-year low. It fell far harder against the yen, a frequent bolthole for the anxious. Investors have started to flock to the safety of US Treasuries. As Europe’s markets opened, the main stock indices followed the lead set overnight in Asia and fell by around 10%.Investors hate uncertainty and the result of the referendum gives rise to a surfeit of it. But the falls in Asia’s equity markets are also in large part an early judgment about the impact on the world economy. Of course, markets often overreact. Britain accounts for just 3.9% of the world’s output; it is not big enough to make the global economic weather in the way America or China can. Then again, America’s economy has been sluggish of late and there are grave worries about China’s ability to escape the shadow of its mountainous debts. Britain’s economy looms large in Europe, where it is a reliable consumer in an otherwise high-saving continent. And any disruption to European growth is particularly unwelcome now.The Bank of England said this morning: “We are well prepared for this.” It may cut its main interest rate from its present level, of 0.5%. It may even revive its quantitative-easing programme, buying bonds with freshly minted electronic money. A recession in Britain nevertheless seems likely. Corporate investment will be hurt by uncertainty about future access to both the single market and to other places where Britain has piggybacked on trade deals negotiated by the EU. In unsettled times, businesses defer whatever spending they can.The same is true for consumers. The majority who voted to leave the EU may think that forecasts of recession in the event of a Brexit vote were a tactic to scare voters. If so, they are unlikely to curb their spending overnight. But as the bleak consequences for the economy become clearer, spending on big-ticket items is likely to slump. The collapsing pound will drive up inflation up, crimping real incomes. Some jobs will go. Hours worked and wage growth will fall. And Britain is big enough for a recession there to have a meaningful effect on Europe’s economy. As a rule of thumb, whatever the reduction in Britain’s GDP growth, Europe’s economy will suffer a drop of about half as much.Brexit will hurt the world economy in other ways. A big concern is the extent to which a retreat from financial risk will disturb the existing fault lines in the world economy, notably in China and southern Europe. Italy has a referendum of its own (on constitutional change) in October. Matteo Renzi, Italy’s reform-minded prime minister, says he will resign if the result goes against him. The Brexit vote scarcely helps his chances. A widening of bond spreads in southern Europe seems likely in the run-up to the poll. The European Central Bank can intervene to swamp the symptoms of anxiety by buying bonds, but it can’t do much more to cure the underlying problem of weak growth.It is trickier to draw a line from Brexit to China. A weaker European economy will certainly hurt Chinese exports. Perhaps a bigger risk is a renewed bout of dollar strength, as Europe’s currencies weaken, which might in turn put renewed downward pressure on the yuan.Even if some investors have short horizons, tumbling stockmarkets reflect some long-term worries. If Britain, long a champion of free trade, can vote to revoke a regional trade deal, how much faith can businesses worldwide put in other international economic agreements? An EU shorn of Britain’s deregulating influence is a troubling portent for the liberal world order. Nationalist, populist and protectionist forces in other countries will be greatly encouraged by Brexit. The WTO recently gave warning that protectionist trade measures in the G20 are multiplying at their fastest rate since 2008. In such circumstances, it would be surprising if the Brexit vote did not have some chilling effect on investment worldwide. It makes curbs on migration of workers a little more likely, which will be costly for businesses. And if Europe exports some of its misery to Asia and America through weaker currencies, it may increase pressure for restrictions on capital flows, too.A lot depends on the kind of trade deal Britain can negotiate with the EU and how quickly. If Britain gets a quick deal with no big reductions in its access to the single market, the grimmer scenarios for the world economy may not come to pass. But markets do not seem to be counting on it.

The Nigel Farage Show2016-06-18“HITLER did it with gas! Merkel does it with paperwork!” From the bow of his trawler, bespangled with anti-EU banners and bobbing on the grey Thames outside the Houses of Parliament, a rubicund fisherman bellowed at the crowds on Westminster Bridge. Baffled tourists posed for selfies as he ranted in the background. Leave supporters cheered and babbled: “When will Nigel arrive?” Word rippled through the assembly that the leader of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), along with his pro-Brexit flotilla of fishing boats, had been held up at Tower Bridge. Yet another establishment stitch-up. “We want our country back!” they chanted.Then it was glimpsed around the bend in the Thames: a Dunkirk of trawlers, barges and dinghies, buzzed by speedboats with “In” flags (“Cameron paid them,” a matronly Middle England type informed Bagehot as others cried “Traitors!”) and a cruiser from which Sir Bob Geldof, an ageing Irish rocker, yelled “Farage! You’re a fraud!” Last of all came the flagship, emitting a boozy whiff as, to loud cheers, it swooshed under the bridge. Holding court on deck, surrounded by cameras and wine-slurping, blazer-wearing “Kippers”, was the man himself: a male Britannia with a ciggy between his fingers and a smirk across his face. This was “The Nigel Farage Show”, and he knew it.Such has been Britain’s EU referendum. David Cameron first promised the vote in 2013, spooked by UKIP’s success in local elections and importuned by UKIP-inclined MPs on his Conservative benches. The result has been an unedifying campaign that has both bolstered Mr Farage and carried his imprint. It has been divisive, misleading, unburdened by facts and prone to personality politics and gimmicks. What might have been a hard-nosed debate about Britain’s future, about the pros and cons of EU membership, has turned into a poisonous row about the merits of what is ultimately Mr Farage’s vision of England: a hazy confabulation of content without modernity; of warm beer, bowler hats, faces blackened by coal dust; of bread-and-dripping, fish-and-chips, hope-and-glory.The outcome has been a contest with the logical architecture of an Escher drawing: Remain and (in particular) Leave issuing assertions that double back on themselves, Möbius-strip arguments that lead everywhere and nowhere. Knowledge has been scorned (“I think people in this country have had enough of experts,” huffs Michael Gove, the pro-Leave justice secretary). Basic facts have fallen by the wayside: Mr Cameron claims Brexit would help Islamic State; Leave implies Turkey, with its 77m Muslims, is about to join the EU. The complicated reality of an evolving union and Britain’s relationship with it has been ignored.Instead that chant on Westminster Bridge—“We want our country back!”—has echoed through the campaign. Back from whom? Johnny Foreigner, mostly, as well as a conniving, cartoonishly evil establishment; at a recent Leave event your columnist witnessed Tories and Kippers urge their supporters to take pens into the polling booth on June 23rd to prevent the intelligence services from doctoring their votes. The referendum has been marked by a pin-striped nihilism dressed up as common sense.Thus it is easy to forget that it was meant to reunite the Tory tribe. Mr Cameron issued his pledge in 2013 to “settle” the Europe issue. Today that aspiration reads like a joke. As trawlermen outside the Palace of Westminster came alongside Sir Bob’s craft and attempted to board it (prompting an intervention from policemen in a speedboat), inside the House of Commons Mr Cameron was skirmishing with his own buccaneering MPs. David Nuttall, one of the 131 (of 330) to back Brexit, pointedly asked when the prime minister would meet his pledge to cut net immigration to tens of thousands (from over 300,000 today).The mood in the Conservative base is even more vitriolic. Most members want to quit the EU. Many of them hold their leader in utter contempt following a campaign in which they believe he has betrayed his principles and abused his position. On June 12th your columnist attended a pro-Brexit Tory rally in Leigh-on-Sea, in Essex, organised by David Amess, the local MP. The star speaker was Ann Widdecombe, the sturdy doyenne of the Conservative right, who paraded about the hall badmouthing the prime minister: “The claims Cameron has been making do not stand up!” she trilled, to applause and shouts of “hear, hear!”To some extent the referendum has revealed things that were already present: the growing void between cosmopolitan and nativist parts of the country, the diminishing faith in politics, the rise of populism, the inadequacy of the left-right partisan spectrum in an age when open-closed is a more salient divide. Yet it is hard not to conclude that the campaign has exacerbated all of these trends. Polls suggest that trust in senior politicians of all stripes has fallen. And that is just the start. If Remain wins on June 23rd, Brexiteers will tell voters they were conned. If Leave wins, Mr Cameron will go and his successor will negotiate a Brexit that does not remotely resemble the promises of the Leave campaign, which trades on the lie that Britain can have full access to the European single market without being bound by its regulations and free-movement rules.Either way, politics is coarsened. Voters will believe their leaders less. Short of a total reconfiguration of the party-political landscape (possible but unlikely), the existing Westminster outfits will look increasingly at odds with political reality. The currency of facts will be debased, that of stunts inflated, that of conviction sidelined. It will be de rigueur to question an opponent’s motives before his arguments, to sneer at experts, prefer volume to accuracy and disparage concession, compromise and moderation. Mr Farage’s style of politics has defined this referendum. It will live on in the muscle memory of the nation.

Turn of the screw2016-06-23BANKS the world over are groaning under the burden of low, even negative, interest rates. The gripes from Germany are among the loudest. In March, when the European Central Bank cut its main lending rate to zero and its deposit rate to -0.4%, the head of the savings banks’ association called the policy “dangerous”. At the co-operative banks’ annual conference this month, a Bundesbank official earned loud applause just for not being from the ECB.Germany’s banking system comprises three “pillars”. In the private-sector column, Deutsche Bank, the country’s biggest, expects no profit this year. That is mainly because of its investment-banking woes, but low interest rates have also weighed it down: it wants to sell Postbank, a retail operation it took over in 2010. Commerzbank, ranked second, specialises in serving the Mittelstand, Germany’s battalion of family-owned firms. It has felt the interest-rate squeeze even more. Analysts at Morgan Stanley place it among the worst-hit of Europe’s listed lenders.Most Germans, however, entrust their savings to the other two pillars. One includes 409 savings banks (Sparkassen), mostly municipally owned; the other, 1,021 co-operatives. These conservative, mainly small, local banks are the most vocal complainers—even though at first blush they have little to moan about. Savings banks’ combined earnings declined only slightly last year, to €4.6 billion ($5.1 billion) from €4.8 billion in 2014. Deposits and loans grew; mortgages soared by 23.3%. Capital cushions are reassuringly plump: their tier-1 ratio rose from 14.5% in 2014 to 14.8%. Co-ops had a similar story to tell. But trouble is brewing.The ECB has flattened long-term rates as well as short ones, by buying public-sector bonds and, starting this month, corporate debt. Ten-year German government-bond yields are near zero—and recently dipped below, thanks in part to markets’ fears about this week’s Brexit referendum. For banks, this means ever thinner margins from taking in short-term deposits and making longer-term loans—from which, says McKinsey, a consulting firm, German banks earn 70% of their revenue.Lenders have been well insulated so far, because most loans on their books were made when interest rates were higher: 80% of loans last longer than five years. Rising bond prices (the corollary of falling rates) have provided further padding as banks’ portfolios gain in value: that effect alone has brought the savings banks €19.4 billion over the past five years. But as old loans mature, they are being replaced by new ones at today’s ultra-low rates. The mortgage boom is thus a mixed blessing: rates are typically fixed for ten years or more.With no increase in ECB rates in sight, the screw is tightening. Half of the 1,500 banks surveyed by the Bundesbank last year—before the latest rate cuts—expected net interest income to fall by at least 20% by 2019. Although banks would prefer higher rates, too sudden an increase would also be awkward, pressuring them to pay more for deposits while locked into loans at rock-bottom rates.Banks are seeking ways to alleviate the pain. Commerzbank is charging big companies for deposits, above thresholds negotiated case by case. (It is also reported to be pondering stashing cash in vaults rather than be charged by the ECB.) Bankers warn of an end to free personal current accounts. But with so many banks to choose from, scope for raising fees is limited.Selling investment products and advice seems more promising; and commission income has risen, as some savers seek out higher returns. Yet low rates have made many Germans, already a cautious lot, even less adventurous. They are stuffing more, not less, into the bank—but into instant-access accounts: with rates so low they may as well keep cash on hand.Low rates are not banks’ only worry. Both bankers and politicians vehemently oppose a proposed deposit-insurance scheme for the euro zone: the savings banks and co-ops have always looked out for each other, and don’t see why they should insure Greeks and Italians, too. Smaller institutions complain about an increase in regulation since the financial crisis—even though they weathered the storm far better than many larger ones. The savings banks’ association claims that red tape costs its members 10% of earnings—and some as much as 20%.Another concern is the march of technology. Germans have been slow to take up digital banking, but their banks—reliant on simple deposits and loans, and still carrying the costs of dense branch networks—are vulnerable to digital competition nonetheless. Number26, a Berlin startup, has signed up over 200,000 customers across Europe for its smartphone-based current account within months. The savings banks plan to hit back this year with Yomo, a smartphone app aimed at young adults.McKinsey reckons that low rates, regulation and digitisation together could cut German banks’ return on equity from an already wretched 4% in 2013 to -2% within a few years if they do nothing in response. The pressure is starting to tell. This month the Sparkasse Köln-Bonn, one of the biggest savings banks, said it would close 22 of its 106 branches. Some rural banks have replaced branches with buses.All this is likely to thin the crowded ranks of Germany’s lenders. Consolidation has been under way for decades: since 1999 the number of co-ops has fallen by half; on August 1st their two remaining “central” banks, DZ Bank and WGZ Bank, which provide co-ops with wholesale and investment-banking services, are to join forces. The pace of mergers has steadied in recent years. Negative rates may speed it up again.

The IMF lays out the grave consequences of Brexit2016-06-18AS IF the economic evidence against Brexit were not already strong enough, the IMF has today published an analysis which shows just what a hit Brexit would be to the British economy. It is an even-handed piece of work, but probably still underestimates the economic costs of quitting the European Union.The IMF wonks open on a cautious note: in the studies on the economic impact of Brexit “the range of estimates is large, and a few studies even suggest the possibility of positive net economic benefits.” The paper then sets about discrediting pro-Brexit economic studies in typically subtle IMF-speak. One such study suggests unilateral abolition of import tariffs following a Leave vote, which will supposedly yield a 4% boost to GDP as trade soars. The fund, though, thinks it unlikely that “it would be feasible to reduce [tariffs] to zero”. Rather, in a post-Brexit, more inward-looking country, “domestic political pressures may cause import tariffs to rise.”Even if it were possible to blow away all tariffs, the IMF staff reckon that a likely permanent depreciation could “completely offset” the impact of such a move. The benefit Britain would get from buying more stuff tariff-free would be outweighed by getting less for a weak pound.The IMF then looks at two future scenarios. In the first, Britain quickly agrees a new trade deal with the EU; in the second, the negotiations are more protracted and Britain eventually settles for basic World Trade Organisation rules.In the first scenario, sterling depreciates by 5%. GDP growth slips to 1.4% in 2017 and unemployment rises slightly. However, the second scenario, in which negotiations proceed slowly, is much more likely to come to pass; few officials believe that Britain would secure a trade deal quickly. That means financial services, which rely on “passporting” rules to export to the EU, will suffer, as will the pharmaceutical industry, which relies on similar arrangements. The level of economic uncertainty will be much the same as that experienced during the global financial crisis, limiting investment and consumer spending.In the second scenario, Britain falls into recession next year. Unemployment hits about 7% by 2018, up from around 5% now (during the financial crisis it peaked at 8.5%). Real wages will stagnate, mainly because of high inflation. Surprisingly, Britain’s trade balance will move into a small surplus, thanks not to the dynamism of exporters but “because demand for imported goods plunges due to exchange-rate depreciation and reduced consumption”. All in all, the IMF’s forecast leans towards the scary end of the spectrum of recent studies.

Britain votes to leave the EU2016-06-24BRITAIN is on its way out of the European Union. In a referendum on June 23rd 51.9% of voters opted for Brexit, on a high turnout of 72.2%. London, Scotland and Northern Ireland plumped for "Remain", while the rest of Britain voted "Leave". The initial shockwaves are already being felt: David Cameron has announced that he will step down as prime minister by October and stockmarkets have plummeted. What happens now is uncertain. Years of negotiations are likely to follow today's result, as Britain tries to navigate an exit from the Union. For now, the initial reaction of the markets is one of panic and chaos.A striking amount of the variation in the vote can be explained by demographics. According to an exit poll by Lord Ashcroft, 73% of voters aged 18-24 voted for Remain, while 60% of voters aged 65 and over voted for Leave. Similar divisions were apparent across education levels: 57% of degree-holders voted to stay in the European Union, while most of those with only secondary-school educations wanted to leave.As results trickled in throughout the night, markets were swift and punishing. A little before 2:00am, as London started reporting results and betting markets started predicting Leave, sterling declined by over 3% in less than 15 minutes. After votes from Glasgow gave Remain a slight lead, the pound quickly bounced back. The optimism was short-lived. By the time the BBC called a victory for Leave around 3:40am, sterling had fallen more than 10% to a price of just $1.33, its weakest level since 1985. Stockmarkets were no less volatile. By the early morning, futures traders were pricing in a 9% decline in the FTSE 100 and a 4% drop in the S&P 500. London markets opened with the benchmark index down a whopping 8%. British banks took a particularly hard beating. Lloyds, Barclays and RBS all fell 30% before recovering to losses of 15-20%.Once the dust has settled migration and visa-free travel will, for many, be the greatest worry of a looming Brexit. Some 3.3m EU citizens in Britain are bracing for the uncertain months—or years—ahead. The biggest community affected will be the Polish with 900,000 immigrants, followed by the Irish and Germans with 400,000 and just under 300,000, respectively. While the Leave campaign has focused on the burden of EU immigrants on the British system, it has somewhat overlooked the fate of British expats on the continent. More than 1.2m Brits currently live in other EU member states, primarily in Spain, Ireland, France and Germany. The expat community will be unsure of what its future holds—just like Britain herself.Read moreAll our Brexit coverage >>

Divided we fall2016-06-18THE peevishness of the campaigning has obscured the importance of what is at stake. A vote to quit the European Union on June 23rd, which polls say is a growing possibility, would do grave and lasting harm to the politics and economy of Britain. The loss of one of the EU’s biggest members would gouge a deep wound in the rest of Europe. And, with the likes of Donald Trump and Marine Le Pen fuelling economic nationalism and xenophobia, it would mark a defeat for the liberal order that has underpinned the West’s prosperity.That, clearly, is not the argument of the voices calling to leave. As with Eurosceptics across the EU, their story is about liberation and history. Quitting the sclerotic, undemocratic EU, the Brexiteers say, would set Britain free to reclaim its sovereign destiny as an outward-looking power. Many of these people claim the mantle of liberalism—the creed that this newspaper has long championed. They sign up to the argument that free trade leads to prosperity. They make the right noises about small government and red tape. They say that their rejection of unlimited EU migration stems not from xenophobia so much as a desire to pick people with the most to offer.The liberal Leavers are peddling an illusion. On contact with the reality of Brexit, their plans will fall apart. If Britain leaves the EU, it is likely to end up poorer, less open and less innovative. Far from reclaiming its global outlook, it will become less influential and more parochial. And without Britain, all of Europe would be worse off.Start with the economy. Even those voting Leave accept that there will be short-term damage (see article). More important, Britain is unlikely to thrive in the longer run either. Almost half of its exports go to Europe. Access to the single market is vital for the City and to attract foreign direct investment. Yet to maintain that access, Britain will have to observe EU regulations, contribute to the budget and accept the free movement of people—the very things that Leave says it must avoid. To pretend otherwise is to mislead.Those who advocate leaving make much of the chance to trade more easily with the rest of the world. That, too, is uncertain. Europe has dozens of trade pacts that Britain would need to replace. It would be a smaller, weaker negotiating partner. The timetable would not be under its control, and the slow, grinding history of trade liberalisation shows that mercantilists tend to have the upper hand.Nor is unshackling Britain from the EU likely to release a spate of liberal reforms at home. As the campaign has run its course, the Brexit side has stoked voters’ prejudices and pandered to a Little England mentality (see article). Despite Leave’s free-market rhetoric, when a loss-making steelworks at Port Talbot in Wales was in danger of closing, Brexiteers clamoured for state aid and tariff protection that even the supposedly protectionist EU would never allow.The pandering has been still more shameless over immigration. Leave has warned that millions of Turks are about to invade Britain, which is blatantly false. It has blamed strains on public services like health care and education on immigration, when immigrants, who are net contributors to the exchequer, help Britain foot the bill. It suggests that Britain cannot keep out murderers, rapists and terrorists when, in fact, it can.Britons like to think of themselves as bracingly free-market. They are quick to blame their woes on red tape from Brussels. In reality, though, they are as addicted to regulation as anyone else. Many of the biggest obstacles to growth—too few new houses, poor infrastructure and a skills gap—stem from British-made regulations. In six years of government, the Tories have failed to dismantle them. Leaving the EU would not make it any easier.All this should lead to victory for Remain. Indeed, economists, businesspeople and statesmen from around the world have queued up to warn Britain that leaving would be a mistake (though Mr Trump is a fan). Yet in the post-truth politics that is rocking Western democracies, illusions are more alluring than authority.Thus the Leave campaign scorns the almost universally gloomy economic forecasts of Britain’s prospects outside the EU as the work of “experts” (as if knowledge was a hindrance to understanding). And it dismisses the Remain camp for representing the elite (as if Boris Johnson, its figurehead and an Oxford-educated old Etonian, personified the common man).The most corrosive of these illusions is that the EU is run by unaccountable bureaucrats who trample on Britain’s sovereignty as they plot a superstate. As our essay explains, the EU is too often seen through the prism of a short period of intense integration in the 1980s—which laid down plans for, among other things, the single market and the euro. In reality, Brussels is dominated by governments who guard their power jealously. Making them more accountable is an argument about democracy, not sovereignty. The answer is not to storm out but to stay and work to create the Europe that Britain wants.Some Britons despair of their country’s ability to affect what happens in Brussels. Yet Britain has played a decisive role in Europe—ask the French, who spent the 1960s keeping it out of the club. Competition policy, the single market and enlargement to the east were all championed by Britain, and are profoundly in its interests. So long as Britain does not run away and hide, it has every reason to think that it will continue to have a powerful influence, even over the vexed subject of immigration.True, David Cameron, the prime minister, failed to win deep reform of Britain’s relations with the EU before the referendum. But he put himself in a weak position by asking for help at the last minute, when governments were at loggerheads over the single currency and refugees.Some Britons see this as a reason to get out, before the doomed edifice comes tumbling down. Yet the idea that quitting would spare Britain is the greatest illusion of all. Even if Britain can leave the EU it cannot leave Europe. The lesson going back centuries is that, because Britain is affected by what happens in Europe, it needs influence there. If Germany is too powerful, Britain should work with France to counterbalance it. If France wants the EU to be less liberal, Britain should work with the Dutch and the Nordics to stop it. If the EU is prospering, Britain needs to share in the good times. If the EU is failing, it has an interest in seeing the pieces land in the right place.Over the years this newspaper has found much to criticise in the EU. It is an imperfect, at times maddening club. But it is far better than the alternative. We believe that leaving would be a terrible error. It would weaken Europe and it would impoverish and diminish Britain. Our vote goes to Remain.

